---
title: "Cohort profile: DOLORisk Dundee: a longitudinal study of chronicneuropathic pain"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2021_05_01-dolorisk
excerpt:
date: 2021-05-01
venue: 'BMJ Open'
#citation: 'Your Name, You. (2009). &quot;Paper Title Number 1.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(1).'
---

<!--more-->

📄 [Publisher's version](https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/bmjopen/11/5/e042887.full.pdf) 

## Authors
Harry L. Hébert, Abirami Veluchamy, Georgios Baskozos, Francesca Fardo, Dimitri M.L. Van Ryckeghem, Mathilde M.V. Pascal, Claire Jones, Keith Milburn, Ewan R. Pearson, Geert Crombez, David L.H. Bennett, Weihua Meng, Colin N.A. Palmer, Blair H. Smith

## Abstract
**Purpose** Neuropathic pain is a common disorder of
the somatosensory system that affects 7%–10% of the
general population. The disorder places a large social
and economic burden on patients as well as healthcare
services. However, not everyone with a relevant underlying
aetiology develops corresponding pain. DOLORisk Dundee,
a European Union-funded cohort, part of the multicentre
DOLORisk consortium, was set up to increase current
understanding of this variation in onset. In particular, the
cohort will allow exploration of psychosocial, clinical and
genetic predictors of neuropathic pain onset.  
**Participants** DOLORisk Dundee has been constructed
by rephenotyping two pre-existing Scottish population
cohorts for neuropathic pain using a standardised
‘core’ study protocol: Genetics of Diabetes Audit and
Research in Tayside Scotland (GoDARTS) (n=5236)
consisting of predominantly type 2 diabetics from the
Tayside region, and Generation Scotland: Scottish Family
Health Study (GS:SFHS; n=20 221). Rephenotyping was
conducted in two phases: a baseline postal survey and a
combined postal and online follow-up survey. DOLORisk
Dundee consists of 9155 participants (GoDARTS=1915;
GS:SFHS=7240) who responded to the baseline survey,
of which 6338 (69.2%; GoDARTS=1046; GS:SFHS=5292)
also responded to the follow-up survey (18 months later).  
**Findings to date** At baseline, the proportion of those
with chronic neuropathic pain (Douleur Neuropathique
en 4 Questions questionnaire score ≥3, duration ≥3
months) was 30.5% in GoDARTS and 14.2% in Generation
Scotland. Electronic record linkage enables large scale
genetic association studies to be conducted and risk
models have been constructed for neuropathic pain.  
**Future plans** The cohort is being maintained by an
access committee, through which collaborations are
encouraged. Details of how to do this will be available on
the study website (http://dolorisk.eu/). Further follow-up
surveys of the cohort are planned and funding applications
are being prepared to this effect. This will be conducted in
harmony with similar pain rephenotyping of UK Biobank.