---
title: "When cooling of the skin is perceived as warmth: Enhanced paradoxical heat sensation by pre-cooling of the skin in healthy individuals"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2023-01-01-cold-phs
excerpt:
date: 2023-01-01
venue: 'Temperature'
#citation: 'Your Name, You. (2009). &quot;Paper Title Number 1.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(1).'
---

<!--more-->

📄 [Publisher's version](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/23328940.2022.2088028) 

## Authors
Ellen L. Schaldemose, Niels T. Andersen, Nanna B. Finnerup, and Francesca Fardo.

## Abstract

A paradoxical heat sensation (PHS) is the misperception of warmth when the skin is cooled. PHS is
uncommon in healthy individuals but common in patients with neuropathy and is associated with
reduced thermal sensitivity. Identifying conditions that contribute to PHS may indirectly help us
understand why some patients experience PHS. We hypothesized that pre-warming increased the
number of PHS and that pre-cooling had minimal effect on PHS. We tested 100 healthy participants’ thermal sensitivity on the dorsum of their feet by measuring detection and pain thresholds
to cold and warm stimuli and PHS. PHS was measured using the thermal sensory limen (TSL)
procedure from the quantitative sensory testing protocol of the German Research Network on
Neuropathic Pain and by using a modified TSL protocol (mTSL). In the mTSL we examined the
participants’ thermal detection and PHS after pre-warming of 38°C and 44°C and pre-cooling of
26°C and 20°C. Compared to a baseline condition, the number of PHS responders was significantly
increased after pre-cooling (20°C: RR = 1.9 (1.1; 3.3), p = 0.023 and 26°C: RR = 1.9 (1.2; 3.2),
p = 0.017), but not significantly after pre-warming (38°C: RR = 1.5 (0.86; 2.8), p = 0.21 and 44°C:
RR = 1.7 (.995; 2.9), p = 0.078). Pre-warming and pre-cooling increased the detection threshold of
both cold and warm temperatures. We discussed these findings in relation to thermal sensory
mechanisms and possible PHS mechanisms. In conclusion, PHS and thermosensation are closely
related and pre-cooling can induce PHS responses in healthy individuals.